your research on your own yeah okay now i i now have
some questions i'd like to ask you concerning
research on your own and that is attitudes towards
it uh how much of your how much of your
meteorological work applied to physical
oceanography and vice versa did you immediately
feel a kinship between the atmosphere and the
ocean Yes. Actually, the equations were all
developed by the same school of oceanography
meteorologists in Scandinavia, so that all you
had to do was change a sign here or there, and you
studied exactly the same equations of motion.
All I had to do was think upside down when I went into
oceanography, and I had most of the theory. Now,
most of the emphasis in your early work, at least on
the first couple of papers I looked at, were in the
area of applied sciences. Your first paper on wave
data and your second one, of course, was on the
application of VT and the pouring of underwater
concrete. Did you always have this direction
towards applied sciences when you began? Or was
this the direction Scripps took you? Well, one of
the jobs I had at Scripps, aside from the VT
section, was in forecasting sea and swell. And I
did that for quite a while. And that was just a
natural outcome of that. The bridge engineers
were building this bridge about four or five miles
from our laboratory, and they were having trouble
with concrete setting. And they wanted to know
what in the world was wrong. And somehow, they
hadn't been taught that the freezing point of
seawater is below zero degrees centigrade. And if
you have fresh water in your concrete, it'll
freeze and spoil. So we said, all you have to do is
put your BT down. You can tell what the temperature
is and know when to pour. It was just an accident. So
in both those cases, these things were just sort of
natural evolutions of what you were working on in
and around scripts. This is right. And did you work
with Walter Munk there, by the way? I took classes
with Walter, but I didn't work with him. Whenever I
think of wave forecasting and so forth, I think of
the work that the script was working on there. This
is right. Actually, I did the wave forecasting
under the direction of Sverdup himself. Oh, okay.
And Sverdup worked with Munk in developing some of
the improved techniques for forecasting.
Mm-hmm. How did you miss Operation Crossroads, by
the way? I don't know. Everybody I know went but me.
I kept looking for your name on Operation
Crossroads. I don't know. I've wondered about
that all my life. I thought maybe I had already
deduced that this had begun your interest in wave
work before I got your Vita. Now...
When you begin to deal with seawater, you know, as
you move into your next series of papers, what led
you there? Well, I don't know what papers we're
talking about. I'm talking about your work with
electro conductance of seawater. Well, I really
perhaps should not have been listed as a co-author
on these. I did not do a great deal of work. Okay. I
think that that... I might better not have had my
name on some of those papers. Okay, well, certain
things I could see. Measuring upper level wind
from a small ship, for example. That seemed to fit
in the kind of category that I would have expected
you to work in. Well, I started off with light, and
my first main papers were all in light. Right. And
then I came to Oregon State, and I had to get into
some sort of oceanography, and the natural thing
was to get into estuaries. So I have a number of
papers on estuaries. Then I have some papers on
intensity and frequency of storms and wave
forecasting in the mid-Pacific. And this came
about because I was a witness in a very large court
case for the loss of a ship. Oh, really? And these
were just direct outcomes of the results of the
research work that I did for this court case. This
was the loss of the Pennsylvania, which was lost
with all hands in 1954. How? Tell me about it. Just
an extremely bad storm. They had something like 18
hours of waves over 20, 30 feet high, and it was just
too much for the Soul Liberty ship, and it cracked
in half, and that was the end of it. How would they
call you in as a witness? Well, the ship was
carrying a fairly expensive cargo vessel, for the
Korean War. It was under charter to the U.S. And
this cargo was lost, and it was insured both by the
owners of the cargo and the owner of the ship. So the
court case was to determine whether there was
negligence on the part of the ship owner. And the
lawyers for the ship owner felt that the bad
weather should be classed as an act of God. If it's
an act of God, then it's nobody's fault. Well, it
turns out that The whole precedent in English law
is that no storm, aside from a tropical hurricane,
is an act of God. And this is the way it came out, and
the owners lost. But what the lawyers were trying
to do was build a case that this was one of the worst
storms that had ever come up. And one outcome of
that was the story, can mid-latitude storms be as
severe as tropical typhoons and hurricanes? And I
think in this paper in the U.S. Naval Institute
Proceedings, I proved beyond a question of a doubt
that there is bad or worse. Yeah. and yet ships are
expected to go through those. Okay. I mean, I was
looking at my list of your papers here, and this has
got to be the one in 58, I suppose. Right. Well,
but almost all the papers in 55 and 56 really are on
light scattering and light effects. This is
right, and this was sort of the ending of my thesis
period. Okay. That's what I wanted to know. Right.
I made a couple of trips on script ships after I got
here and wrote, couple papers there, or one paper,
Selective Transmission of Light in Tropical
Pacific Waters. But then I turned over and the next
batch are all on coastal oceanography.
Absolutely. The next thing that you apply are
really on estuary work with some work on water
temperatures. I noticed you've done one on
disposal of low-level radioactive waste in the
Pacific coastal waters. This was a committee
report, a committee by John Isaacs headed by John
Isaacs, and we worked out, tried to come up with a
solution for the problem, and I don't know
whatever happened to the report because you never
hear it referenced or anything. Okay, well, that
was why I was so interested. I'd never heard of it
before, and it just all of a sudden came at once and
sort of appeared, particularly since your work in
coastal waters around here. Well, I was on this
National Academy committee for two or three years
while this was being written. Are you optimistic
about the disposal of nuclear waste and what have
you in the ocean?
Personally, I think it's perhaps the only
solution in the long run, but most people won't
agree with me. I think that the oceans are big
enough that if it's properly diluted that we can
get rid of some of it. If we don't get rid of it in the
water mass itself, then I think we can bury it in
sediments. The idea of burying it on land just
horrifies me. You're pumping it down into
aquifers. So I take it from that, and with all the
work you've done along the coastal zone, is that
possibly you don't consider the ocean in such a
danger of pollution as one might be led to believe.
Well, I'm sure that it's badly polluted near large
ports and near large sewer outfalls. But I think
the open ocean, aside from certain persistent
chemicals used in agriculture, I think it has a
tremendous ability or resiliency to pollution.
Okay. I certainly don't want to put words in your
mouth, but do you see the oceans then as an
extension of man's life on Earth? That is, is that
their primary purpose? No. Okay. I think that as we
get more and more people on land and as our natural
resources are depleted, we're just going to have
to move out into the oceans to get more and more
material. With your work on estuaries and what
have you, are you optimistic about mariculture or
aquaculture? I think it's strictly a matter of
cost. As things get more and more expensive, we'll
do more and more of these things. This is showing up
in Japan. They have a lot of aquaculture going on
there. It's just a matter of cost, what we're
willing to pay and what we can pay.
What about mining from the sea, as long as I have you
on that topic?
I think it's inevitable that we're going to begin
mining more and more. The nodules will be first,
and eventually we're going to have hard rock
mining. I don't see any other solution. So you do
see, then, us turning more and more to the sea, I
suppose, for both food and mining materials.
Well, in 1957, during the IGY, oceans just all of a
sudden received all kinds of funding partially
because the ocean was going to feed the teeming
millions. That idea seems to have fallen into some
disregard. I think the idea of feeding the teeming
millions perhaps is not as good as it should be. I
don't really think there's that much material
present. If we're willing to lower the trophic
levels and can eat plankton in some way, then I
think we can feed many more people I think of
aquaculture or mariculture as being a source of
crabs and oysters and delicacies that are
high-priced things. Okay, then you see it more as
gourmet food, if I may say that. Gourmet food,
right. What about you guys doing some work up and
down? Well, not you guys, because that's wrong,
but the marine fisheries are doing work up and down
the coast with ranching and salmon, for example. I
think this is a fine idea, but salmon is certainly a
gourmet luxury. It's $3.80 a pound in the market.
You don't see for dropping to a dollar a nickel a
pound like hamburger meat or anything. No, sir.
Okay, unfortunately. I was afraid you were going
to answer that way. No. All right, now, when I have,
after you, working in predictive water
temperatures, you know, beginning in 64, it's
only Oregon and Coast. I might talk a little bit
about predictive water temperatures if you don't
mind. Okay, sure. I want you to talk about what you
want to talk about. In about 1956 or 57, I was still
getting only $10,000 a year from ONR, and I
couldn't expand in any way. So I talked the Fish and
Wildlife Service into a contract, I think it was
for $10,000, to predict water temperatures in
reservoirs. And this had been done rudimentarily
by several people in the past, but I developed a
system. under this contract. And then I went on to
have a private consulting firm called Water
Research Associates. And over a period of 10
years, I made 30 studies of dams and reservoirs
from Alaska to Southern California for all sorts
of agencies and predicted before the dams were
built what the temperature structure would be
downstream. And this is a combination of
oceanography, meteorology, and limnology.
Limnology, right. Now, this is much broader than
I'd anticipate. I had some questions on...
Straightened two sets of teeth, took my family to
Europe, put all three kids through college. Oh,
that's excellent. That's excellent. I had
several questions about temperature that I had
jotted down here, but I want to know something else
differently now that you're talking that way.
Limnology. How did you become interested in it?
Did you just see the potential for measuring these
temperatures? Well, I was casting about for
something to do to make myself somewhat
indispensable at Oregon State, and they didn't
have any courses in physical limnology, so I
started teaching physical limnology, and this is
how I started. Okay, and did you find it extremely
difficult to make any transfer? Did it seem to fit
in well already with your work of atmosphere and
ocean? I think it was a natural transfer. There was
no problem. Actually, the few reservoirs that
were built, it turned out the forecasts were
reasonably good, and everybody seemed to be quite
happy with them. Do you still do this? No. After I
had the system going, and business was pretty
good, two or three engineering firms set up their
own system and copied my forecasts and took it away
from me. They were working full-time on it, so that
was the end of it. No part-time work. Then after
that, what do you move into? Well, I began to do,
when I started research again, I cast about for a
subject that wasn't being covered that I thought
might be important, and it turns out that air-sea
interaction was becoming very important at that
time, and it was concentrated really on two
scales, and one scale was what you might call the
meter scale, micrometeorology over the oceans,
and there was a lot of work done on that, and then it
jumped to synoptic scale, several thousand
kilometers, and there was very little mesoscale
work being done. So I thought, well, I'll study
mesoscale meteorology over the oceans, and this
is what I've been working in since. And what sort of
work have you been doing? Well, there have been a
number of large-scale international air-sea
interaction studies, and I have taken part in
several of these and have studied the mesoscale
primarily the mesoscale distribution of winds
over the ocean surface
variability organization in the variability
these studies have been the jason british jason
expedition in 1972 the german john swap
expedition in the north sea in 1973 The Japanese
Amtech study in 75, and this September I'll take
part in the British Jason 77, the next year Jason
78. In 79 I hope to take part in a Somali current
study. So that each time I join these large
organizations, simply to get the logistic
support and to be able to furnish data which other
people need. One of the most interesting studies
has to do with mesoscale organized confections.
If you get a high enough air-sea interaction
difference, you'll find that there are cells
formed which are the order of 30 to 50 kilometers
across, which act almost identical to large
cumulus clouds. And during the AMTEC study, I set
up some buoys between Korea and Okinawa
and measured the characteristics of these cells
as they moved across the buoy array. I could tell
where the air was coming down, where it was colder
and drier, coming around the edges of the cells,
how it warmed up underneath the cells as the water
passed over the warm ocean waters, and so on.
Now, are you working with satellites?
No, I use satellites photos because they'll tell
you, you can look at them and see these individual
cells and get their size and how they change. It
seemed to me for a while, and partially because of
the work that was going on in terms of waves, wave
currents,
that for physical oceanography, satellites and
buoys were the wave of the future, if I may use that
pun. That this was what was going to redo physical
oceanography, which is going to make physical
oceanography again sort of the Enfield it had once
been but was no longer. Well, I think everybody
felt this was true. But the buoys have not really
panned out. We've taken a sort of a jump toward,
well, the popular thing now, aside from
satellites, are various and sundry towed
instruments, or free fall instruments, that give
you an in situ measurement of currents, salinity,
temperature. And there are all kinds of these fish
that are towed.
do all sorts of high-speed physical oceanography
that seems to be the wave of the future right now.
What kind of data do you get from those? Well...
Most of them have concentrated on fine structure
in the currents, and in fine structure in
temperature, fine structure in salinity,
various and sundry types of waves, internal waves
that occur in the oceans, identifying them,
measuring their scale, speed, and so on. Now, I
noticed in 1967, weather and solar radiation.
that a paper on, was this leading towards this,
your work on solar radiation, was this leading
towards production of energy? No. No, okay. No,
I'm just interested, it's a source of heat that
goes into the oceans, which then is given back to
run the atmosphere. Okay, so still, best I can tell
you that the second one, incoming solar
radiation, dealt with light, is that? Where are we
now? On 68, incoming solar radiation right here
over the tropical ocean? in nature. That seemed to
me like that was dealing with light rather than,
you know. No, this is heat. And heat, okay. Our sole
interest was heat. Then that would fit in nicely
then with the rest of the things you're doing,
which involves heat on down through 69 and so
forth. Right. Okay. All right. I just wanted to
make sure that you hadn't slipped the paper in on me
that I didn't recognize along the way. No. On these
international voyages, how cooperative were the
other international oceanographers? Well, I In
almost every case, I've found that they're
extremely cooperative. They appreciate the
assistance that you're able to give them, and they
give you assistance in turn. For example, I had
been having trouble getting a ship to use in 1968
for the British Jason expedition, and the Germans
came on and volunteered six days of ship duty, ship
time, without cost if I needed it. It turns out that
I will use the Woods Hole ship instead. All right. I
hate to ask you to make invidious comparisons, but
what would you say about oceanography in other
countries as compared to oceanography in our own?
Are there any countries who are particularly
ahead of us in the science of oceanography, behind
us? I think as far as sheer volume is concerned that
the Russians are considerably ahead of us. But
their quality appears, from what I can see, to be
spotty. They have some extremely fine
theoreticians, they have some good practical
people, but in general they have a lot of
pedestrian work done too. Any comments on anyone
else you'd like to? Well, I think the quality of
research in England and Germany, particularly
Germany, is very high but they do not have very
extensive programs compared to the U.S. I've
worked with the Germans considerably and I find
them very sharp people and just as good as any we
have in this country. But you think it's just a
matter of volume in those cases? I think it's more a
matter of volume. I
want to return to your work here in a second, but I
want to ask you one more question here. Do you see
with current international restrictions
developing, As an oceanographer, your work being
pushed back closer and closer all the time to the
shore? I think this can happen, and I'm hoping it
won't happen. And I know that a number of
laboratories in this country are working
feverishly to sort of clear the way in the future to
work with various countries by bending over
backwards trying to help them. And I think this is
about the only way we're going to do it. If we're a
source of help and encouragement, to a less
developed country, I think we'll be more welcome
than if we're arrogant. Okay, so you think it is
going to be possible as a scientist, perhaps, to
work with the 200 mile limits? Well, we have to work
with them. Yeah, that's true. Oregon State, we're
not the only school that's done this, but I
followed what we've done. About 10 years ago, I
started cooperative work with various West Coast
South American countries. We visit them whenever
we can. have encouraged their students to come.
We've tailored the coursework to their
background rather than to a standard background.
We have 15 Latinos enrolled at the present time,
which is more, I think, than anybody else in the
country. We concentrate on Mexico down to Chile.
We've sent people down to Chile to teach. Several
people have gone there.
We've done cooperative work aboard Mexican
ships. two large cooperative studies with the
Mexican Navy. My new student in the fall will be
from Costa Rica. We already have one from Costa
Rica. So that we really have bent over backwards to
develop the Western tier, because this is where we
want to work in the future. And I think it's good for
both sides. I had no idea you'd done all that. When
did you make a decision deliberately to recruit
students? About 10 years ago. About 10 years ago.
Was it sort of accidental? Did you think you need
contacts in that country or you just? Well, I
was fortunate and got a prize, $1,000. And my wife
in a weak moment said I could do what I wanted with
it. Oh, okay. So I was going to meet a script ship, I
think it was in Panama, and I just took a month off
and spent my $1,000 traveling all over all the labs
in South America and got acquainted with people
and set the groundwork. Okay, good. What did you
get the prize for? Pardon? What did the prize come
for? Distinguished professor thing, something.
Okay, here at Oregon State? Yeah. Oh, that's
excellent, excellent. Now, in terms of just
surveying your research, we'd only really got
until about 1969, okay? What would you like to
mention in this period and through here of
particular significant accomplishments, you
think?
Oh, goodness.
Well, I worked with Bill Quinn on a number of
things. He was the primary investigator, and I had
a lot of rap sessions with him. And there was some, I
think, fairly important work came out of this.
Now, Bill Quinn has changed from working on the
heat budget of the tropics to the prediction of El
Nino. And I've not done any of that work with him. It
was about that time then that I began to do more and
more air-sea interaction work. OK. In 1972, I
changed over full time to research the NRC
interaction. I have one other thing to ask before
we get to 1972.
A conference on the interaction of sea and
atmosphere, is that the move that makes the change
for you?
About 1971, as I said before, I cast about, where
was there a hole? There was a hole, and that's how I
got started. Now that conference, that was just a
report on a meeting, the first big air-sea
interaction meeting that the American
Meteorological Society set up.
And incidentally, I got up after having the flu to
go, I was chairman of one of the sessions, and I
shouldn't have gone, came back and had a heart
attack. Oh, good. I just wore myself down. I
shouldn't have gone to that meeting. And that was
five years ago then? Yeah. That was right after
that conference. Okay. And, well, it didn't seem
to slow your research down very much. You seemed to
have recovered marvelously. I've been very
fortunate. And so in the last several years, we're
in effect involved in and interaction between
oceans and seas. What sort of work have you done
there that you think of particular significance?
What's been the most important thing? What have
you looked for? Well, I've found evidence of
organized convection, evidence of roll
vortices. Two papers have been published with
clear evidence of
roll vortices. This evidence is in the surface
wind field. It shows an alternating of directions
as these vortices move past a buoy. Then, for the
first time, I've reported on the
near-surface change in meteorological
parameters and oceanographic parameters, which
are associated with open and closed mesoscale
convection cells. One interesting thing that's
not of great importance, but I found evidence of a
turd-ironal tide in winds, which hadn't been
reported before. I've
shown that over relatively short distances, wind
statistics over the ocean can vary considerably,
and that was not known. The usual thing is to take a
weather ship and extrapolate a thousand miles all
around it. You just can't do this.
meteorological driving forces are subject to
major changes in time and space that need to be
studied if you're going to study any part of the
RCNR action process.
As a matter of fact, your work has continued on
through 1977, doing these same kinds of things. Is
that the direction you think your work will take
you in the future? I think this is all I'm going to do
from here on out. You think you're going to look at
this large-scale interaction and the rest of the
way through? Mesoscale interaction. I'm sorry,
mesoscale interaction. This is miles to maybe 100
miles or kilometers to 100 kilometers in time from
minutes to a week. Okay. And out of curiosity, do
you think weather prediction will come out of
this? I think that, aside from resources in the
sea, that the best opportunity for benefiting
mankind that oceanographers and meteorologists
have is in weather forecasting. And in order to do
this, we have to understand air-sea interaction
processes much, much better than we do at the
present time. And this is one of the reasons we're
working. How far away are you from long-range
weather forecasting?
Well, there are two ways of looking at that. One of
the most pressing things is to improve our
forecasting, say, from a four-day forecast to a
five- or six- or seven-day forecast.
We've been on A lot of people have been working on
this, and no one seems to have come through with any
breakthroughs. We're just sort of stuck on a
roughly four-day forecast. But as far as
long-period trends are concerned, six months in
advance or a year in advance, I think the work of
Nimaeus and a number of other people indicates
clearly that we're going to be able to forecast
trends a little better than we could before. But
the most important, well, that's important in
itself. But improving our weather forecasting by
two days would make a tremendous economical
impact on the country. Routing of fuels,
electrical network management, all of these
things depend on how weather changes around the
country. And if we could do it in six or eight days,
it would just be wonderful. But I'm not sure we can.
And that's what we're all working on. And that's
where your work is pressing presently. I think so.